>> My name is Ali Ozer.
I'm the Manager of the Cocoa Frameworks team at Apple.
And Kevin Perry, who's my colleague in
the team, will be joining us shortly.
So what are we talking about today?
We will cover changes in Cocoa since Leopard.
And there's a lot of changes we've done since last WWDC,
so we're going to give special coverage to those as well.
And we will also provide pointers to other sessions.
There are a lot of topics.
In addition to stuff we added to Cocoa, there's advancements
in Objective-C, Garbage Collection and other frameworks
such as Core Data and Core Location and so on.
We're not going to cover those, and just
give pointers to them whenever we can.
And in addition I would like to point out
this is not what's new in Cocoa Touch.
There is another session for that.
This is primarily focused on Cocoa on the Desktop.
There is a session at 10:30, What's New in Cocoa Touch.
So here are the topics, sort of
the rough outlines of the talk.
And this is just a very rough high-level outline.
There a lot of individual topics,
we'll go into throughout the talk.
So first I want to talk about 64-Bit.
Now, we talked about 64-Bit before in many
sessions, so this is going to be fairly brief.
As you know, we've been making good strides
towards 64-Bit over the last few releases.
And in 10.6 almost all the applications
on the system are now 64-Bit.
Now, back in 2006 in the 64-Bit
overview session, which I gave,
here is we did some prophecy and
we said 64-Bit applications.
We prophesied that they were not going to be.
They were not here in Leopard, but
post-Leopard they would likely be here some day.
And back then, we were looking forward,
thinking maybe, you know, five years, whatever.
Well, it's now just three years
later and 64-Bit apps are here.
The system, the center of gravity of the
system has shifted towards 64-Bit apps.
Most of the time the users are
just running 64-Bit apps right now.
What this means is if you have a 32-bit-only a2pplication
it's time to consider moving it to 64-Bit apps.
Because just like we said back then, you know,
you don't want to be the only one left
with a 16-bit app in a 32-bit world.2
That's the same way it is really
with 64-Bit, so some day is here.
Now, what does 64-Bit mean ford Cocoa?
It's actually on the surface a very small change.
We just introduced three new types.
These are 64-Bit versions of the types commonly used in our
APIs, and their alternate definitions for them for 64-Bit.
So if you're writing a brand new 64-Bit application,
or if you're even writing an iPhone application,
just use these types and you'll be fine.
If you have an existing application, we have
a script help you convert your application.
You, here's the script.
It's called ConvertCocoa64, and the one on Snow
Leopard is newer than the one on Leopard, by the way.
To run it you'd make a copy of your sources.
You just run the script on every
source file in your application.
And then you go ahead and fire FileMerge or your favorite
diffing tool and basically confirm all the changes
because there might be some that you don't like.
Now, if you already run the script and
converted your application to 64-Bit,
then you're wondering do I need to run this script as well?
The answer is no.
This script just does a few things a little better,
but these are already things you
probably would have fixed or found.
It basically generates far less warnings, for instance,
which makes the conversion process a lot easier.
So that's about it as far as 64-Bit.
There is a great document, the 64-Bit Transitidon Guide.
You can type this into Google or just go to this URL
and it will tell you all about what 64-Bit means.
What the conversion script does and various
other issues you need to watch out for.
Now, as you know, Carbon.
The high-level Carbon APIs are not available in 64-Bit.
And one thing we've done in Cocoa is try to fill
in the various holes that we had in Cocoa APIs
where you might have fallen to Carbon to get something done.
In some cases, these new APIs are just one-to-one
replacements of functions with new methods.
In other cases, we introduced brand new
extractions in Cocoa to satisfy this need.
So I'll start off with NSApplication, which
now has a new API setPresentationOption
that lets you control the system user interface elements.
So this means if your application, for instance, wants to
run without the Dock Visible, or your application wants
to disable the ForceQuit menu,
etc., you can do this with this API.
Now, note that the PresentationOption's API
which returns your current presentation options,
and currentSystemPresentationOptions which returns to
you what the current, no matter whatever app's set at,
what the current setting is, these are key value
observable so you can actually find out even
when another application changes the setting.
Now, the options you might pass to this include these.
You can, for instance, cause the Dock to be hidden
or cause it to be AutoHidden, the same with the menu.
You can disable AppleMenu, ProcessSwitching,
ForceQuit, and etc. Elements like that.
Now, there's a tech note 2062, which goes
into detail about how these options interact.
It's in terms of the system UI mode API which is
the old Carbon API that's being replaced here.
And we'll update the tech note at some
point to talk about this new API as well.
We have some enhancements in NSWindow, again providing
API that was previously available through Carbon.
You can now disable server-side dragging, so
basically this makes a window non-movable.
And once you set this you can choose
to move the window yourself.
Because as you know in Cocoa windows are typically moved
on the server, which means windows can be moved even
if your application is busy or not responding.
But this will prevent that and you can do whatever you want.
You can now hit-test any screen location
to find out what window there is.
Note that this API returns an NSInteger
rather than an NSWindow.
And this way we can return any window, not
just windows belonging to your application.
So this is a window number that can
track any window in any application.
And finally, we can return to you the
window numbers of all visible windows,
whether they are in your application or any application.
And this returns an NSArray of NSNumbers.
And the options you can provide are justYourApplication
or allApplications, and justThisSpace or allSpaces.
NSRunningApplication is a brand new class,
which replaces the processes API from Carbon.
This is a pretty straightforward API.
It returns to you properties of applications
that are currently running on the system.
You can find out things whether, like
whether the apps are hidden or active.
What their localized name is.
What their icon is and so on.
And so you can do a lot of things that
involve running applications with this API.
Note that some of the properties here are also
KVO-observable so you can observe them change.
A running application, in addition to returning
properties of applications lets you hide, terminate,
even forceTerminate if you wish, and activate
running applications with these APIs here.
And there's ways to get back running applications.
For instance, you can ask for your current application.
You can ask for a running application,
which corresponds to a UNIX process ID.
Or you can get back an array of running
applications that share a bundle identifier.
And the reason for returns on the array here
of course is you can have many applications
that share the same bundle identifier.
There is also one more way to get running
applications, and that's to ask NSWorkSpace
for the array of all running applications.
And note that this array here is also
KVO-observable, so you can see this list change.
Speaking of NSWorkspace, there's a
lot of new APIs on this Workspace.
I'll just touch upon one now.
You can display a Spotlight search results window.
So this is equivalent to a user bringing up a
Finder window and typing in a search string.
The search string you give will be
used to bring up this Finder window.
The user can then go ahead and fine-tune the query.
Note that this corresponds to the Carbon API
HISearchWindowShow if you might have used that before.
Along the same lines, we have some NSView
API to bring up the Dictionary application.
You can either use the first API here to bring up your
basic Dictionary application that uses the Dictionary
or various other, you know, Thesaurus
and etc. for a given word.
Or you can use the second API to bring up
a, customize the way the window is shown.
For instance, it can be shown on
top of your document and so on.
Now, note that the second argument here,
showDefinitionforAttributedString with four arguments,
also takes a block as an argument which lets you fine
tune the positioning, and we'll talk about blocks shortly.
Another area where we've made a
lot of changes is NSPasteboard.
You might know that Carbon has this concept
of multiple items in its NSPasteboard APIs,
while in Cocoa that feature has always been limited
to specialized cases like file names, keyboard type.
Well, NSPasteboard now supports multiple items.
In addition, there's a more, a new and more general API.
It's in terms of UTIs, we have these two
protocols, PasteboardWriting and PasteboardReading,
which many AppKit classes implement and
you can also implement them yourselves.
We also have a Pasteboarditem class,
which is a generic container
to let you participate in the new
Pasteboard APIs more easily.
Now, I'm not going to say much more about Pasteboard
here because there is a half a session dedicated to it.
And this session is Thursday afternoon at 2:00.
The other half of this session is Services.
You might know Services.
It's always been in the first menu or the
second menu, in your Application Menu.
It's been, the Services features has been
with us since 10.0, in fact, even before 10.0.
What we've done to Services now is make them
more discoverable, make them context sensitive,
and also allow the user to customize them.
So here's what the Services menu looks like in 10.6.
If you've seen the Services menu before
you'll notice that it's got icons.
The capitalization's better.
It no longer has nested sub-menus.
And also note that there is an
item here, Services Preferences.
If selected will let the user enable or disable individual
services that they wish to use, so it's fairly handy.
Again, this is part of the Pasteboard
and Services talk Thursday at 2:00.
Bunch of changes in NSMenu.
There's actually a lot of changes.
Just highlight three.
You can now display a menu as a popup
without having to resort to Carbon APIs,
which always involve some underhanded
dealing that I don't want to hear about.
You can allow a delegate to control the menu location.
Basically return a brand new rect where the menu appears.
And finally, you can stop the menu
from tracking at any point.
So if you are doing something special with the
menu and you want the menu to just go away.
No animation.
Nothing. You can call this method,
cancelTrackingWithoutAnimation.
The last topic I'm going to cover
in this section is NSEvent.
We now have methods to let you get user preference
settings, doubleClickInterval, keyRepeatDelay and so on.
Pretty straightforward.
And we have two other methods that let you
get the mouse state and the keyboard state.
So basically, what modifier flags are
down or what mouse buttons are pressed.
Now, note that these are class methods, not instance
methods, so you can ask these questions at any time
in your application and get the current state.
You don't have to have a current NSEvent.
The other event enhancement is Event Monitoring.
You now have the ability to monitor events coming
in to your application, or in fact any application.
This first API here, addLocalMonitorForEventsMatchingMask,
lets you install a monitor
that sees every event coming into your application.
And you can also affect them.
Meaning, you can either let the event
pass through or substitute a new event.
Or in fact, just stop the event altogether by returning nil,
and that's sort of the ultimate
form of censorship, if you wish.
The other method is the global one, addGlobalMonitor.
This one is similar, except it
doesn't let you affect events.
You can only observe them.
Now, note that these return IDs.
When you are.
When you do not want to monitor anymore, you just
call the removeMonitor and pass that ID in there.
There is some limitations to the usage of these things.
For instance, if your application's in the tracking loop,
the events won't be seen by this, by the local monitor.
In addition, events going to, say, secureTextFields will
not be visible here, and that's probably a good thing.
There is an events talk, which will
cover these and many other topics.
That's tomorrow afternoon at 3:30, User Events in Cocoa.
Now, note that here as well these two methods
have handlers, which take block arguments.
And as you can see, we're using block
arguments more and more in Cocoa APIs.
And I want to talk about blocks right
now and then I'll move on to concurrency.
Blocks are snippets of code that capture lexical scope.
If you were at the sessions yesterday,
you saw some examples of them.
But I really want to make blocks
concrete for you so that, you know,
when you see a block you can easily
read it and it becomes second nature.
So let me just give you a few examples.
Here's a block example.
We're declaring a variable called myBlock,
and you can recognize that this is a block
because there's a caret instead of a *.
If it this was a function variable it would have been a *.
So the variable's called myBlock.
It's a block that returns an int, and it
takes a single argument, which is also an int.
Now, note that this is the body of the block.
Here we're actually creating a block, a literal
block, and assigning it to the new variable.
This is the whole block.
A literal block.
The single argument we've given it a name
of num here, and here is that actual body
of the block, which could be arbitrarily complicated.
In this case, we're just using the incoming
parameter num, and we're multiplying it by multiplier,
which is a value that's captured off the stack
In this case 7.
So that's captured.
It's a constant in this case.
And of course, if you were to run something like,
say, myBlock(3), you would get back the result of 21.
Now we will cover blocks in good detail in a talk tomorrow.
Yes, tomorrow afternoon at 5:00.
Objective-C and Garbage Collection Advancements.
But I do want to talk about them a bit more.
Here is another place where you
might see blocks quite often.
This method enumerates lines using
blocks, which is a new method on NSString.
This is the method of taking a block argument.
The block returns nothing, so it's void.
It takes two arguments, an NSString and a Boolean *.
And the name of the parameter is block.
So this API basically enumerates NSString and
calls your block with every line in the string.
And you can stop the enumeration by setting *stop=yes.
There's a bunch of related APIs, and I'm
not going to talk about these right now.
In NSString and that's an attributed string because we
do have a text processing talk, which is Friday morning
at 9:00 a.m. That will go into more
details about this and plenty more.
The last example of blocks is one
that's used in the typedef.
Here we're creating a typedef called Comparator.
It's a block that returns a comparison
result, so less than, greater then, equal to.
And it takes two arguments, the objects being compared.
Let me show you a concrete example of an API that uses this.
NSArray has an API called sortedArrayUsingComparator.
And as you can imagine it sorts
to array given the Comparator.
And here is an actual usage.
You might call, for instance, myArray
sortedArrayUsingComparator and pass a block,
which in this case simply calls
localizedStandardCompare on the two arguments.
This is also a new method we've added.
Now, as I said the block here could
be arbitrarily complicated.
It can do all sorts of stuff.
In this case, it just happens to compare to
two arguments with this alternative method.
Now, I'm going to talk at this
point a bit about block naming.
As you know, in Cocoa getting APIs
right is very important to us.
In addition, being able to communicate our conventions,
our guidelines so that our APIs are predictable,
and you yourselves can also create APIs, which are
consistent, those are very important factors for us.
Now block is a challenging name, because when used
as a verb it means something totally
different than what we use as a noun.
For instance, if you're a casual reader of some code and
you came across myArray block, instead of returning a block
that might seem like something
that blocks execution of the array.
Or similarly, window beginSheetblock:,
while it was intending to take a block
argument you might think it's just an argument
that takes yes or no to block the sheet.
So instead of block, we want to use more descriptive names.
More descriptive terms in our method names.
And several that we've come up with include
Handler, Provider, Test, Comparator.
Handler for something that just, like
a delegate almost handles something.
Provider for something that takes some
arguments and returns another argument.
Test is something that is a predicate, returns yes or no.
And Comparator you've already seen.
Now, we will still use block in
our APIs, but only in generic cases
where it's not easy to describe what the block does.
So let's go back to our collections example, NSArray.
Here's the sorting method we already saw.
We have two other categories of functionality
that use blocks in our collections.
One is Enumeration, and the other one is Searching.
Now, note in the Searching one
you're passing basically a test
And for every, this enumerates to the array, and for every
item that returns yes from your test, it will go ahead
and put in an index set and return
all the indexes that match this test.
Now, in addition to these three methods
we have a lot of other variants.
We have versions of these for the other collections.
Dictionary, Set, and IndexSet.
In addition, we have variance of these that take options,
and if appropriate a subset to work on so you can choose
to integrate only a part of the array for instance.
So there are many other methods along these lines.
I'm not going to show you those now in detail.
But I do want to talk about concurrency, so
let's move on to the topic of concurrency.
So we saw Enumeration, Searching and Sorting
and you can now do those concurrently.
The way you do that would be to provide an option.
Either EnumerationConcurrent or SortConcurrent.
And here's what the sort case might look like.
You would call sortedArrayWithOptions and you would pass
SortConcurrent and you would pass in your Comparator.
So what this means is that the provided block may be
invoked concurrently, so it should be thread-safe.
The other thing to note here is that the
overall operation is still synchronous,
meaning the method will not return until it's done.
Let me give you an analogy for this.
Imagine you go to the carwash.
You drop off your car.
Typically you would wait until your car is
washed, and that's a synchronous operation there.
Now, you might take your car into the
carwash and one person might wash your car.
Well, with this concurrent option it's as if you took
your car to the carwash and 12 people descend on your car
and all wash it, and clearly your
car's going to be washed faster.
Now, also note that if you took your car to
the carwash and 200 people descended on it,
that'd be a big mess because they
probably would just wreck the car.
And, of course, it's responsible given NSArray
and the Grand Central Dispatch that it uses
to make sure that sort of disaster doesn't happen.
But again, your car.
You will wait there till your car is finished, except
the concurrency will let it happen much more quickly.
The other thing to note here is that if you are enumerating
concurrently you are no longer enumerating in order.
You're not going from 0 to end.
You're going to be all over the map, and
that's obvious with something to keep in mind.
The other concurrency topic is
NSOperation and NSOperationQueue.
These are clearly important pieces
of the concurrency story in Cocoa.
Simon talked about these yesterday.
The big change here is that these classes have been
reimplemented to be on top of Grand Central Dispatch.
Now, note here the sort of the power of Cocoa Extraction.
These classes were available to you in
Leopard and a lot of people are using them.
In Snow Leopard, we have reimplemented them on top
of this new facility, which means they are faster.
They can handle a lot more load.
In addition, they now share in the same pool of resources
that Grand Central Dispatch does, which of course is great
because it gives the system a better
idea of how to balance things.
However, for the most part your code is not affected at all.
Your code, which works on 10.5, will work under 10.6.
It's just faster, better, and so on.
Now, we also took the advantage to add a bunch of new APIs.
NSOperations can now have thread priorities,
and you can specify a completion block
to be executed when the operation is done.
NSOperationQueue now allows you add multiple
operations and optionally wait till they're done.
You can also add a block as an operation, and we also
have an explicit class for this, NSBlockOperation,
which lets you add a block in an operation
and tweak various other parameters for it.
NSNotificationCenter has also one
new method to allow concurrency.
This method here now allows observers
to get notifications concurrently.
So just like before, you're adding an observer
specifying a notification name and object to filter on.
Let me show you the Leopard version of this API.
You are specifying the name and object, but in the Leopard
version you would provide an observer and a selector.
So the selector to get called on you observer.
In the Snow Leopard version these have been replaced
by a queue and a block to execute on that queue.
If you provide nil as your queue, you
basically get the Leopard behavior for this.
Now, the good thing about this API is that it's fairly,
it's very compatible from a posting point of view.
There is no change to the notification posting code.
Because what happens here is all the posting is done, but
all the observers have to be done until this method is done,
I mean, until the notification posting is done.
So in that way this is sort of analogous
to that carwash example I gave you before.
Until, you know, everything might
happen concurrently but, you know,
the execution will not continue until it's all done.
Because if we did sort of open the
floodgates and make it asynchronous,
you can imagine that a windowWillResize notification
would get delivered before window did resize
and that would cause a lot of fun things.
The last concurrency topic I want
to touch on is Concurrent Drawing.
NSView subclasses can now opt-in to Concurrent
Drawing just by setting setCanDrawConcurrentlyYes.
What this means is when a hierarchy of views
is being drawn in Display or displayAsNeeded,
views that have specified this property
can be drawn concurrently with other views.
Now again, Display or displayAsNeeded
is blocked until drawing is done.
So again, this remains fairly compatible
to existing practices.
You just have to make sure you've
used Drawing is thread-safe.
Also note that because of this approach, in most cases
the thread-safety demands on your model are not changed.
You know, if there was cases where you couldn't
change your model in other threads, those still apply.
Now, these and the other topics I touched upon
will be covered in more depth tomorrow morning
at 9:00 a.m. in Concurrent Programming in Cocoa.
Now, there is one more concurrency topic to talk about,
and that's Concurrent Document Opening,
which the TextSet application now does.
And to talk about this and some other new
Snow Leopard features we are showcasing
and TextEdit, I'd like to invite Kevin Perry on stage.
[ Clapping ]
Thank you, Ali.
Concurrent Document Opening is just one of the
enhancements that we made for TextEdit in Snow Leopard.
And I'd like to show you how valuable these various
enhancements are, and how simple they are to implement
so you can extrapolate that to your own applications.
So starting with Concurrent Document Opening, as
you're probably familiar if you open a ton of documents
in TextEdit, or you're loading over a very slow
network, you're going to be prepared to see this guy.
This mini pizza of death or the weight curse.
Obviously because the loading process is blocking the main
thread, preventing it from processing any user events.
Concurrent Document Opening allows us to push all of
these document-reading processes to background threads,
allowing us to see a lot more of this guy.
Less of this guy since we are no
longer blocking the main thread.
And enabling Concurrent Document
Opening is fairly straightforward.
You simply need to make sure, Step 1, that
your document creation process is thread-safe.
There's several entry points in NSDocument,
including your init method and your reading method.
First of all, you need to make sure
that you disable and do registration
within those, for the duration of those methods.
That's a good idea to do anyways, but it's especially
important in the context of Concurrent Document Opening.
You also need to make sure that your
reading methods are thread-safe.
That they can be run concurrently, open multiple
documents on background threads at the same time.
The same goes for makeDocumentWithContentsOfURL
and openDocumentWithContentsOfURL display error.
These overrides on NSDocumentController.
Now chances are that your application overrides one or none
of these methods, in which case you need to do nothing.
But TextEdit, for example, overrides
the openDocumentAsContentsOfURL
to handle the transient document before
displaying either documents that are loaded.
Just after doing that the second and final step is
to override NSDocuments canConcurrentlyReadDocumentsOfType,
this class method.
And ReturnYes for all the types that
you can safely read concurrently.
And here we see the implementation for NS, for TextEdit.
And we ReturnYes for any type that
is not HTML or web archived.
That's because WebKit currently is unable to
read multiple HTML documents concurrently.
So we ReturnNo for those types.
So this is fairly straightforward and very worthwhile.
Your users will really appreciate being able to do this and
not having the application spod while you're trying to load.
Now, you're probably wondering what is this
type conformsToType and kuTTType constants?
Hopefully you're familiar with them, but
if you're not we'll introduce them briefly.
These are, deal with UTIs.
They're Uniform Type Identifiers.
UTIs extract all this various file type information that we
have the system including file extensions, HFS type codes,
MIME types, NSPasteboard type names, and
your own custom NSDocument type names.
They are organized in a unified hierarchical type system,
which allows you to reduce complexity when dealing
with the interrelated types in your NSDocument applications.
And in connection with this system.
Snow Leopard recognizes over 400 UTIs out of
the box, and the UTI database is extensible
with your own custom types and your own applications.
So for adopting UTIs, in TextEdit
we first go to the Info.plist.
Here we see the entry for the RTF type, and I've highlighted
the CFBundleType extensions, MIMETypes and OSTypes entries.
Now, as I explained, all of these, all
this information is extracted away by UTIs,
and we can actually completely get rid
of it and replace it with a single entry
of LSItemContentTypes with the public .RTF UTI.
Now, this is just a representative
sample of TextEdit's Info.plist.
There are seven or eight types that TextEdit supports.
And so you can imagine that this is a fairly,
this simplifies your Info.plist significantly.
In the Info.plist we also switch from the NSPasteboard
type names to UTIs for the Services declarations.
And in code wherever we were using the old custom
type names, we switched to the System Defined UTIs.
Now, this carries with it an interesting implication,
because wherever we used to compare types with isEqual
since they were just strings that we defined, that's
no longer strictly appropriate because that ignores all
of the rich hierarchical information we have in UTIs.
The proper thing to do is use this, as you saw before,
NSWorkspace API Type conformsToType which will ReturnYes
if a type is the same as or a sub-type of another type.
So this lets us access that information.
Now, in TextEdit there are relatively few changes
that we needed to make to accommodate these things.
Here you see five method overrides in
NSDocument and NSDocument Controller
that either take types as arguments or return them.
And so here we needed to make sure that we were
using the proper type names and using this new API.
The same goes with the methods that
implement the services, the TextEdit events.
Now, compare that with all of the various API and overrides
that are in TextEdit that didn't require any changes.
And you can understand that this is a fairly simple change.
The changes are well localized to a specific subset of
your code and it's not a very complicated thing to do.
So hopefully you can extrapolate that to your own
applications, then participate in UTIs as well.
The next enhancement is one that I really appreciate.
It's Save As PDF.
Now, if you're like me I have to remind
my wife and my mom fairly often how
to save an arbitrary document as
a PDF in various applications.
If you go to the Print panel, find
the Save As PDF button and do that.
It's not a very discoverable UI,
especially for novice users.
So we've provided in TextEdit this Save
As PDF menu item right under the Save
As menu item, so it's much more discoverable.
And you're probably thinking, well, in that case
I would have to do a lot of this work myself.
That's a lot of additional code to maintain.
And yes, we could have had you implement
dysfunctionality like so, taking care of the NSSavePanel.
Bringing it up, setting it up, getting the response
and dealing with hidden file extensions and so forth.
Not something we wanted to make you do.
But here we see the NSPrintSave path entry in the
Dictionary that we passed to printDocumentWithSettings.
If we actually can get rid of that, the
printDocumentWithSettings method will bring up the SavePanel
for you and prompt the user, allowing
you to get rid of all this code.
Making it a much simpler process it allows you to
maintain, and now you really have no excuse not
to implement this in your own applications.
Last but not least is Text Checking.
There have been various types of text
checking that have existed in Mac OS X.
It started in 10.0 and even earlier.
Spell checking.
And Leopard's.
In Leopard we gained grammar checking,
automatic quote substitution, and link detection.
In Snow Leopard we gained language and script
identification, data detectors, automatic dash substitution
and text replacement and spelling correction.
Some very powerful features, and we wanted
to adopt these in TextEdit to showcase them.
And we'll see just how complicated this was to do.
We simply added four preferences to the TextEdit
preferences pane and bound them to NSUserDevelopsController.
And called for methods on NSTextView
to enable or disable them as requested.
And that's it.
Not very complicated in other words.
And adopting that, if you use NSTextView should
be just as simple and we encourage you to do so.
There's a lot more to the text
checking APIs in Snow Leopard.
There are new APIs, both in NSTextView and in
the spell checker that are much more general
and lets you do this text checking on arbitrary strings.
There's API that lets you modify and do custom text
checking as well, and so we encourage you to find out more.
Again, go to the Text Processing talk on Friday.
So in summary, four enhancements.
Concurrent Document Opening.
Simply make sure that your document creation is
thread-safe and override one simple method on NSDocument.
UTI Adoption.
It really simplifies your code and your Info.plist.
And involves fairly localized easy-to-understand changes.
And Save As PDF UI plus one simple method implementation.
And Text Checking.
We added UI prefs and four method calls.
All these things very simple.
Very worthwhile.
Please do the same in your own applications.
Now, moving on to something completely different.
NSCollectionView.
Now, we've worked hard.
Well, we introduced NSCollectionView in Leopard,
and there have been lots of improvements.
We've worked really hard on it in Snow Leopard.
And we've made sure to address all
of the, or as many of the bug reports
that we could that you have so graciously filed on it.
We've ensured smoother relayout animations, more
predictable layouts, and better auto-resizing behavior.
The selection indexes method, propertyOnAsCollectionView
is now properly KVO-compliant
as was advertised in the documentation for Leopard.
And it's much more reliable.
You shouldn't have to worry about any unexpected
crashes while using NSSelectionView in Snow Leopard.
And there's much more that I think you will appreciate.
One other big thing though, is that we noticed when
people were binding fairly complicated prototype views
to their NSCollectionViewItem's
prototypes, sometimes during the replication
of these prototype views, the bindings
would be inexplicably lost.
And some people found various work-arounds for this,
usually involving overriding NSCollectionViewItem's
copy with its own method.
And there they would either set the bindings manually,
or load a NIB that would provide the
view to the new collection view item.
Now, we thought this was a really good idea, and we decided
to make some appropriate changes to do a similar thing.
Here is the NSCollectionViewItem declaration in Leopard.
In Snow Leopard we've made a significant change here.
It's now no longer a subclass of
NSObject, but NSViewController.
Thereby inheriting all of NSView Controller's NIB loading
behavior, making this a lot easier and a lot more reliable.
Adopting this new NSCollectionViewItem
approach is very simple.
You move your prototype view to a dedicated NIB.
Connect the prototype view to the file's owner,
which is actually the NSCollectionViewItem,
with your bindings and other connections.
And in, where you instantiate your
NSCollectionViewItem in your NIB, you set the NIB name
and bundle identifier there so it can find that NIB.
This not only allows us to do exact replication of your
item views, but it also allows us to do more efficient
and lazy loading of each of the item views.
So it allows you to have collection views with many,
many more contents because all of that is done lazily.
This is also completely backwards compatible with Leopard.
If you make no changes to your
applications using NSCollectionView,
it will still work fine just as it did in Leopard.
So, but we really encourage you to make those
changes because it is so simple and very worthwhile.
So we actually have a quick demo just
to show you how simple this is to do.
So if you have used NSCollectionView
you've probably looked at this sample code.
It's a really great sample icon
collection that shows you how this works.
You can see.
I'll demonstrate for you just how well
NSCollectionView is working in Snow Leopard.
Things are very smooth looking, and this is even without
Layer Back Mode on, so that's just a demo for that.
So now we'll do the work very quickly
in just a couple minutes
to use the new NIB loading behavior for our prototype views.
So here we see the NIB that contains our
NSCollectionView and the prototype view.
We're actually going to cut this view out of
this NIB completely and create a new view NIB.
Get rid of the one it gives us there and
paste in the one from the other NIB there.
Now, the next step is to create, to make the
file's owner the NSCollectionViewItem and connect
that to the view so it knows what view to load.
Now, we need to rebind all of the bindings
from this view to the NSCollectionViewItem.
So the first is we set the transparent property,
bind that to the filesOwnersRepresented.
Oh, actually the selected property.
And will NS negate Boolean.
This will allow us to simulate the selection highlight
since this is a box drawing a background here.
And here is our prototype view.
We want to bind this image view to the
filesOwnersRepresentedObject.iconproperty.
And we'll rebind this to the filesOwners,
this text view, RepresentedObject.name.
Go ahead and save this.
It's ViewPrototype, is what we'll call
it, and we'll add it to our project.
And we come back here to our CollectionViewItem
we've instantiated here.
And here it sets to.
We've set it to load the ViewPrototype NIB,
and that's all the changes we need there.
Make sure those are saved.
Come back and run.
And you see its working just as it did before.
It's not a flashy demo, but it shows
you just how simple it is to do,
and we have a CollectionView that's
working exactly as it did before.
So we really encourage you to make that
transition in your NSCollectionViews.
Now, there's one last feature that we added to
NSCollectionView that I'd like to demonstrate for you,
so let's TextEdit here and select a few things
And Drag and Drop.
We have. Now, Drag and Drop support in NSCollectionView,
one of the most requested features in NSCollectionView, so.
Yes.
[ Clapping]
That really, Drag and Drop really brings us up to par
with the other Collection-type views,
NSTableView and NSBrowser and so forth.
And you'll find that the APIs are very familiar
if you've used NSTableView's Drag and Drop APIs.
The APIs use indexes for efficiency's sake,
so we're not shoveling around larger arrays
of represented objects or NSCollectionView items.
And we have new APIs to facilitate this.
ItemAtIndex, which, which will return the
NSCollectionView item for a given index in the collection.
And frameForItemAtIndex will return the frame that
a view will be displayed in on the CollectionView.
This will return the result without
even loading the view from the NIB,
so this allows us to continuously be loading our views.
Of course, the Drag and Drop API allows
for local reordering as you'd expect.
And is compatible with all NSDrag Pasteboard clients.
Anything using the NSDrag Pasteboard will
work as you'd expect with NSCollectionView.
The gesture to perform a Drag and Drop is a click-and-hold.
We have to do this to differentiate
Drag Selection from Drag and Drop.
But we encourage you to start using CollectionView.
There's lots of new features there.
Moving on to some of NSCollectionView's
distant cousins, NSTableView and NSBrowser,
there's going to be a talk devoted to these two classes,
Presenting User Data with TableViews
and Browsers on Thursday.
We encourage you to see that if you
want more detail about the enhancements.
The many enhancements in these classes.
But here's a few highlights.
NSTableView now has API to reload
specific rows and columns if you know
that the data backing those rows and columns have changed.
So you don't have to load the entire
view, which can be inefficient.
We've allowed much more customization of the selection
highlight behavior and drag destination highlight behavior.
And you can control which cells or columns can
receive focus as you tab through a TableView.
You can configure a column.
Each individual tableColumnSizetoFitBehavior
when you double-click on the column header.
You can configure how that will resize.
And you can control which columns and how it can be
ordered by the user and how those columns can be reordered
NSBrowser has some significant new APIs.
If you're familiar with NSBrowser the old way to do
it was the delegate was told to push a whole bunch
of items themselves into an NSMatrix, and you'd
have to do that for each column of the browser.
This wasn't very intuitive and made it somewhat
cumbersome for people to use NSBrowser.
But we provided a new item-based API, which will pull
information from the delegate about a tree of items.
It's much more intuitive and will make
NSBrowser a lot easier to use than Snow Leopard.
There are several other APIs and enhancements, most
of which require using the new item-based delegate,
so we really encourage you to switch as soon as possible.
Some of these include variable row heights,
allowing the user to edit the contents of a browser.
And custom preview columns and column headers.
Now, what are those, you ask.
Here's a screen shot of Finder.
As you know, as you heard from the keynote, Finder
is now using Cocoa and indeed it does use NSBrowser.
And here's a screen shot of, we've
connected to a server and selected a file.
This part that shows the information about a server is
a column header, and this part that shows information
about the selected file is a preview column.
Using these new APIs you can replicate
all of this behavior exactly.
So that's all for those topics.
We'll move on.
Back to Ali.
[ Clapping ]
So now I'd like to talk a bit about File System Efficiency.
File System Efficiency is a large effort we undertook in
Snow Leopard to reduce the number of times we hit the disc.
As you know, disc drives and especially
network drives, network servers, etc.,
can be unpredictable as far as performance.
And they often are an important piece
of the application performance puzzle.
So to that end, we focused on developing
NSURL as a central API
to reference files, and also to get information about them.
So NSURL now provides much more complete
access to things you want to know about files.
So file properties basically.
And one thing this does is this eliminates the
need to convert between various representations.
You no longer have to convert to an FSRef
to get this information or convert back
to a POSIX path to get that information and so on.
In addition, we now cache property values in NSURL.
So that if two different parts of the program ask the
same NSURL for the same property in a very short time
where it hasn't changed, NSURL can respond very quickly.
We also took this opportunity to do some API
enhancements and improve and add more NS errors
and provide better error reporting throughout.
So the property access in NSURL is fairly straightforward.
getProperty.
Oh, I'm sorry.
getResourceValue and setResourceValue.
These two APIs get or set the value of one property.
You can also use the bulk versions
resourceValuesforKeys, or setResourceValues.
Now the properties you can use here, there's a lot.
And I'm just going to give you a small sampling here.
You can get or set the name, for instance.
You can ask for the localized name.
You can ask whether it's a package, etc. Now note that
some of these properties the values are actually NSImages
or NSColors, and these are AppKit
objects while this is foundation API.
So these APIs will return these answers
if AppKit is loaded into your application,
which of course it almost always is for Cocoa applications.
We also added NSURL Path Utilities.
You might be familiar with NSString Path
Utilities where you can manipulate paths, you know.
Add file extensions, remove components and so on.
We now have the equivalent for NSURL.
[Applause] Thank you.
And we also have this one other notion,
this new concept of File Reference URL.
Many of you may be familiar with FSRefs which basically are
file references that can actually track a file by reference,
by ID so that the reference is valid even
if the file is renamed or its parent
Any of its parent directories have been renamed.
This is useful in some specialized cases.
So NSURL now also features this.
Basically you create one with the
method called File Reference URL.
Here's an example.
I'm creating one URL, a filePath URL.
And then I'm creating another, a second URL
which is a fileReference version of that URL.
Here's what the two URLs would look like.
Now, they reference the same file.
However, the first one has a path in it
while the second one has this ID in it.
But note that the second one is still an RFC
compliant file: URL, so it's still a very valid URL.
Now, this is transparent for most uses.
Meaning you can still access resource values.
You can extract the path and so on.
However, it is really for specialized uses.
For instance, in the context of a regular application
you probably only want to use this for the files
that the user might manipulate and move around,
and that often involves documents, for instance.
And since NSDocument already uses this facility
you might not actually need to yourself.
Another thing to note here is that although this looks like
it might be a good solution, this is actually not a good--
this is not meant for persistent, because
the ID you get there might be different
between different reboots of the machine.
So this might not continue referencing
the same file correctly after a reboot.
For persistence you actually want to use bookmarks.
We have this new concept of URL
Bookmarks, which is basically an NSData
that contains a persistent form of NSURL.
You create one with this API here,
bookmarkDataWithOptions, and it returns NSData for you.
Now the options here include the ability to ask for
a fairly minimal piece of bookmark data for instance.
Or you can even choose to ask for bookmark data,
which is the same as an alias data file from 10.5.
So you can actually save these away and read
them back as alias files on previous releases.
To recreate an NSURL back from a bookmark you
would use this API, URLByReservingBookmarkData.
There are two options here I believe.
The first option says whether this API should
mount volumes, if volumes need to be mounted.
And the second API says where this API should put
up UI if authentication or any other UI is needed.
And of course if you don't provide those options
and those are needed, then this API will fail
and return an error into NSErrorArgument.
NSFileManager has a lot of changes again,
to support this new NSURL direction.
NSURL versions of existing functionality
in here are just three samples.
Copy, move and removeItem now have URL versions.
We also can now do Directory Enumeration with URLs.
This new API returns a Directory enumerator like before.
Now, note that there are some extra
arguments here for enumeration.
One of the arguments is keys.
You can provide as a hint the list
of properties you're going to fetch.
This is just a hint, but if you provide this
list this API might pre-fetch these properties
for you making it faster to enumerate through the items.
You would provide nil if you just want the default behavior.
You can always of course ask for other properties as well.
It's just this might speed things up a bit.
The options argument allows you to skip subdirectories
or skip package contents, which is actually quite nice.
And skip hidden files if you want.
And finally note that this API takes an error handler.
It will be invoked on every error.
If you ReturnNo from this on any
error then the enumeration stops.
NSFileManager also has a Safe Saving API.
This is equivalent to the FSExchangeObject
API that we have in Carbon.
Most of the time you do not need to use this.
You can get away with just saving files
atomically and that's good enough.
But this is what you really need to do
document level saving totally correctly.
And since NSDocument uses this, you may never need to.
But of course, if you're writing your own
document-based application not using NSDocument,
this is a good API to look at.
Now, FileWrapper may get the award for one
of the most improved classes in Snow Leopard.
And of course, many of you might be
thinking FileWrapper, what's that?
What does it do for me?
It's an often-ignored class.
What FileWrapper does it's a representation
of File Packages.
It can represent flat files, symbolic links.
But more commonly it represents a folder full
of other files, which represents a document.
What we call a File Package.
In Snow Leopard there's a lot of API cleanup.
We now use NSURLs, return NSErrors.
And we've also given control over
lazy and mapping behaviors,
and implementation was just pretty
much overhauled throughout.
FileWrapper also has more complete support for metadata.
It will now preserve extended attributes,
for instance, of the files you put into it.
[Applause] Thank you.
Some FileWrapper fans out there.
Now, here's the Reading APIs.
initWithURL, readFromURL.
Now, NSFileWrapper typically tries to do the right thing.
What this means is if you have a pretty
large folder with a lot of files in it,
FileWrapper will not read the whole thing into memory,
for instance, because, you know, it doesn't need to.
That's a default behavior.
However, note this scenario where the user
drags a, say, a folder into your application
and the next thing they do is they'll
go and delete that folder.
So to accommodate those kinds of
scenarios we do have various options.
The immediate option means do copy everything into
memory, and this is something you might want to use
when the first time an attachment or a
document is brought into your application.
Of course, after that when you create FileWrappers
for places you know you might not need this.
The other option is the do it without mapping option.
FileWrapper might often use File System
Mapping as a way to optimize its behavior.
And it will avoid File System Mapping when it knows
the files are coming from a network directory.
But there are times when you might know better, so
you can provide this option to say don'tMapAtAll.
For writing there's this writeToURL API.
This also has some options, but I actually want to talk
about the third argument here, the original argument.
This method now does a very good job of incremental saving.
What this means is if you already have
your FileWrapper saved on disc somewhere
and you're saving it elsewhere with
a little, did some modifications.
If you provide the location of the original one,
FileWrapper will actually use hard linking as a way
to very efficiently copy the items
that have not changed in between.
So it enables incremental saving
and does a very good job of it.
And I mean, notice like even something like a
keynote document, this presentation we have here.
Or let's actually talk about presentations you saw
yesterday which have multi-megabyte movies in them.
Most of the time when the user hits Save, all
they're changing is the text in the slides.
They're not changing the movies, the sounds, the pictures.
So FileWrapper can just hard link those, so it's a good win.
NSWorkspace we talked about before.
Here's a few other changes.
The NSURL changes, I just want to highlight these.
It now has asynchronous file copy and recycle methods.
Now, these are truly asynchronous, meaning you call
these, the file copy or recycle starts to happen
and these methods return while still going on.
So this is analogous.
Earlier we used a carwash analogy.
This is analogous to you going to the carwash,
giving them your keys, going back home
and then they call you later you tell you your
car is ready, so that's what this one does.
And the callback here is the completion
handler block that both of these take.
And I want to give you an example of how these work.
Let's say you want to duplicate three files.
One of these files has already been copied before.
Another one of these has not been copied before.
And the third one actually does not exist.
So when you call the duplicateURL's API the results you get
back are you're going to get back this Dictionary, newURLs.
It's going to tell you that the item that was not
yet copied has been copied as NotYetCopied copy.
But note that the one that was already copied
is going to be copied as AlreadyCopied copy 2,
because that's what the Finder would have done of course.
So it actually tells you what the name of the copy is.
And finally, note that you'll get back an error,
which tells you that the file Nonexistent could
not be duplicated because it was not found.
And again, these error messages will adjust themselves if
there are multiple files that cannot be copied and so on.
Now, at this point I just want
to pause and talk about NSErrors.
You're seeing a lot of NSError
arguments in these APIs we're adding.
But note that we're adding NSError API, NSError
arguments to APIs where having NSError matters.
We don't add NSError arguments to every single API.
In fact, we add it to a small subset of new APIs.
But we add it in cases where it matters, because
where the error is going to be bubbled up to the user.
And we want you and your applications to be able to
present these errors without having to parse them apart,
tell what the kind of error it is, you know.
Have a big switch statement and so on.
You just want to take this as-is and present it to the user
and have the appropriate warnings,
recovery options and so on displayed.
And so that's what we really encourage you to do as well.
You know, if you add NSErrors in your program, choose the
places where they will really matter and do a great job
of making sure the user never gets
some, you know, horrible error message.
That they're always clear and concise,
and tell the user how to recover from it.
OK. So at this point I just want to
touch upon a few remaining topics.
Shorter topics.
So one is NSSavePanel.
There's a bunch of changes in NSSavePanel.
One of the tuning methods we've added are to do sheets
using blocks, which is actually a very natural step.
So here are the two APIs.
And I want to show you how these APIs,
how these work compared to Leopard.
So here is how you brought up a save sheet in Leopard.
You would basically create a savePanel,
and then you would go out
and call beginSheetForDirectory
and provide it six arguments.
Two of the arguments were an object
to invoke, and a Selector to invoke
on that object when the user dismissed the SavePanel.
And then you would implement that method, of course.
Here is the saveDone:returnCode:context: method.
The context allow you to pass some context
in, because sometimes you need to do that.
And in that method you can look at the
result and do whatever you need to do.
In Snow Leopard this has been reduced to just this.
It's pretty much equivalent.
You now call this method beginSheetModalForWindow
and it takes two arguments.
And the second argument it the blockToExecute
when the Save Panel is dismissed.
Note that the work you do here in Leopard is the same as
the work you do here, so it's exactly the same code as far
as the amount of the work that's been done.
Now, also note that in the Leopard
case here there are three arguments.
The panel, the return code, and the context.
While in the block version there's only
one argument, and that's the result.
That's because anything else that needs to be passed into
this block can actually be captured as a part of the block.
For instance, note here that the panel, which we
created here, is actually captured by the block,
so we don't need to pass it as an argument.
And the same of course goes for the context.
Blocks are a great way to eliminate all these context
arguments that we need to add in a few places.
Now, while speaking of NSSavePanel, there's actually
a few nifty openSavePanel user level features
that I'd like to highlight for you.
[ Silence ]
So one of them is that you can now right-click on the
column header in ListView and add additional columns.
So here is your OpenPanel for instance.
Just right-click.
There's a bunch of columns to select from and bingo.
You now have your kind and your
size columns in your OpenPanel.
You can now hit cmd-shift-period
to temporarily view hidden files.
There you go.
Oops. Let me show that again.
Sorry. OK.
Slow motion.
Bam. There you go.
OK. And note that the user can do this
in the context of any application.
There's also API that lets you control this better.
So if you decide your application needs to edit that
command, these .files or hidden files on a regular basis,
you can actually control this by
providing UI for the user if you wish.
Here's another option.
Kevin touched upon this earlier.
But you can now double-click.
In the case of OpenPanel you hit right edge of
the header to automatically resize a column.
So here is the Kind column, which is a bit truncated.
You go ahead and double-click right
there and it will autosize
to show the contents, and that
of course works on any column.
And last but not least you can now hit Space
in the OpenPanel to Quick Look selected files.
So here we have a selected item.
Hit Space, and you will be able to Quick Look the files.
And if you have.,.if you have multiple
items you can go back and forth
and still this way more carefully select
exactly what file it is that you want to open.
Now, NSImage also probably gets an award for
most improved overhauled class in Snow Leopard.
And NSImage, by the way, is also another example of the
benefits of Cocoa Extraction where we have done a ton
of implementation changes under the hood and, but in
a binder compatible way for most clients and the way
which gets you a lot of performance benefits.
So performance benefits is a big part here.
One way to achieve this with better
impedence, match with the Quartz-type CGImage.
And we also no longer cache images in windows.
We actually cache them in other ways, which are
much more compatible with Quartz and much faster.
We also took this opportunity to introduce
some APIs and deprecate some APIs as well.
Now, I'm just going to enumerate these APIs very quickly
but, and give a pointer to a session where this is covered.
You can now create NSIMage directly from CGImage
and you can also very efficiently extra a CGImage.
You now have.
[Applause] Thank you.
You now have better control over
drawing parameters of NSImages.
You can now hit-test a point or a rectangle in an image.
And what I mean by that is you can check a
point or a rectangle to see if it's transparent.
This is, for instance, one thing, which
previously required you to extract pixels.
Rummage through the pixels, figure out the bitmap
format just to see whether it was transparent.
You can now do this with one API.
You can now automatically interpret, this
is actually automatically done for you,
orientation info of pictures coming from
cameras so they will appear correctly.
And you can set accessibility in the description, which
means when the image is displayed in various contexts,
VoiceOver will be able to read the description to users.
And you can pass NSImage directly into
Core Animation setContentsMethodNow,
while before you had to extra a CGImage.
And we now have many new standard images.
As you know in 10.5 we started this.
We started creating brand new high-resolution standard
images, and we've added many new images to that set.
So collect them all.
OK. And the talk to go to to hear more about
NSImage and a lot of other fascinating facts
about NSImage is, this is Session 111 I think.
It's Thursday at 3:30.
NSImage in Snow Leopard.
Along those lines I just want to talk
quickly about NSView Layer Redrawing.
If you use NSViews with layer backing,
one thing you might have noticed that is
when NSViews are using AppKit generated
layers, when that view is being animated,
larger or smaller, the layer is redrawn at every step.
And that's to give you the highest fidelity presentation.
But now in Snow Leopard we have this
API, setLayerContentsRedrawPolicy,
which lets you stop that from happening
and control it better.
In Leopard, the behavior was basically this.
NSViewLayerViewContentsRedrawDuringLiveResize,
which redraws every step.
You can now choose one of these other
options, including neverRedrawIt
or drawItOnlyONceBeforeTheResizeStarts and so on.
Now, in addition to this API we have this other API
that lets you control how the layer
should be displayed if it's not redrawn.
You can for instance have the layer scaled in various ways.
Or you can have the layer pinned to an edge or corner.
So if you're using NSViews with layer backing, and you're
having them resized, this is definitely an API to consider.
Multi-Touch.
You might have heard about Multi-Touch at the last WWDC.
We now have support for standard gestures on the trackpad.
So Magnify, Swipe and Rotate.
And although we exposed this in Snow
Leopard, this actually works back to 10.5.2.
However, now we've also gone ahead and added support for
arbitrary touch events and these work on Snow Leopard only.
This is an opt-in at the NSView level.
So your view would call setAcceptsTouchEvents
and will start getting touch events.
Now, until any view in an application calls
this, no touch events will be delivered
to the application, or no individual touch events.
And our newest responder methods, which is
of course what we always do with events,
touchHasBegun, touchHasMoved, touchHasEnded and so on.
These are fairly straightforward.
We've also added a new class called NSTouch.
This is analogous to the UI touch class from the
iPhone, but also different in some important ways.
Now, to hear more about Multi-Touch
and any of these events topics,
go to User Events in Cocoa, which
is tomorrow afternoon at 3:30.
Another API we've added is DockTilePlugin.
This is actually a new protocol.
Now, you've seen iCal and how spiffy it is being able
to show you the date, even when it's not running.
And you might have wondered how you do the same thing
without hackery, and you can now do it with this protocol.
And I was going to show you, I was thinking I
shouldn't show you the whole API codes, you know.
We're not showing whole APIs.
But in this case it turned out it's so
embarrassingly simple I'll just show you the whole API.
There's two methods and you only
have to implement one of them.
So basically what happens is you create
a plug-in inside your application.
You put the name of your plug-in inside your Info.plist as
NSDockTilePlugin equals whatever the plug-in you created is.
And you go and implement this protocol.
And by that, I mean you implement setDockTile.
The dock will call you with the DockTile at the
appropriate time, and you can go ahead and fill it
in and do whatever drawing you need to do.
And you can update it whenever you wish.
And, you know, you can update your DockTile
even when your application's not running.
It's very, very simple.
So I think at this stage we are running short
on time, so it's time for Sudden Termination.
Now, what Sudden Termination does is it enables
your applications to be quit very quickly.
And by quit I mean killed very quickly.
They don't even get a chance to quit.
It turns out that whenever you tell
an application hey, it's time to quit.
Quit. Even if the application has got
nothing to do, it still fiddles around a bit.
Takes its sweet time.
Sometimes it even goes into page your stuff in before
it decides it can quit, and that's just not good.
You know, you want the applications to
go away as soon as possible if they can.
So for this we have this notion of if you're
clean, which means if you can be killed
without any loss of data, we'll just kill you.
Now, there's API where of course an
application can say hey, I'm not clean.
I'm dirty.
And the way it does that is it calls
disableSuddenTermination and enableSuddenTermination.
You can either call this around a small block of code,
which, where you have some critical activity going on.
Or more likely you might call it for
instance, when the user dirties a document,
types something into a document, you would call Disable.
And later when the document is saved you would call Enable.
So basically during that time, since the document is
edited but not saved, the app would be unkillable.
Now, note that AppKit marks an app
as dirty during event dispatching.
So this actually takes care of a lot
of little cases so that you don't have
to worry about all these individual little cases.
Whenever the AppKit sends out an event during
the processing, the app is considered dirty.
This requires opt-in of course.
We can't just go start killing apps left and right.
It's very easy to opt-in, though.
You either call enableSuddenTermination when
you're launched, or else you go put a key
in your Info.plist saying that
yes, you can start life off clean.
So Sudden Termination we have added
some tool support for it.
Activity Monitor.
The Activity Monitor application has some support.
If you right-click on the column headers in
Activity Monitor, you can choose a bunch of other,
I don't know if you knew this, but you can
add additional columns to be displayed.
And one of them is the Sudden Termination
column, which is right here.
Now, note that here it says Yes for
apps that are actually killable,
and No for apps that are not killable at this instant.
So of course, if they are not killable, what that means
is they'll just go through the regular Quit Negotiation
and regular Quit Path, so it's not like, you know,
just because they're not killable it
doesn't mean it's the end of the world.
It'll just take a little longer to quit.
But the more apps that are killable,
the faster log-out or shut-down will be.
Another place where we added support is Instruments where
you can find out why an application is not killable.
So let's focus in on this middle section here.
Note that the count, the disable count
is alternating between 0 and 1, 0 and 1.
Well, that basically indicates the AppKit
event is enabling and disabling it for you.
But note that suddenly the count goes up to 2
and 3 and starts alternating between 2 and 3,
which means the app is no longer
killable because the count is not 0.
That's where the 3 is.
So by clicking around in these events where things look
fishy, you can note from the back trace on the side here,
you can note that NSDocumentsUpdateChangeCount was called.
And in fact, this corresponded to a time in TextEdit
where I typed a character into the new window.
And since the document is not dirty and not saved, TextEdit
is now unkillable, and that just basically reflects that.
So this is a great little tool to find out why your
application may not be killable and you're trying
to make it killable, so definitely look into it.
Now, we are relatively short on time so, and
we have a ton of other important changes,
so I'm just going to show them to you all now.
And actually this is just a part of them.
And I'm really going to not give you much time to read
through this stuff but, so I'll
just leave it up a few seconds.
Read quickly.
Come on. You too.
And but one thing I'm going to do is point out
where to go for much more details on all this stuff.
And of course, one answer that we
always like to say is release notes.
Release notes might not be the
best-written prose in the world.
It's basically from engineers, you know,
typing on the keyword right to your eyes.
But it does communicate a lot of the changes that we
have done, so it's a good thing to browse through.
We them for AppKit and Foundation.
We also publish these things called Changes docs.
If you look through your Snow Leopard
documentation you might have noticed AppKit Changes,
Foundation Changes and so on.
In fact, for a lot of other frameworks as well.
And those actually enumerate every single
change that is in the appropriate APIs.
You can also just open up a header file.
Like let's say you're interested
in NSCollectionView or NSTableView.
Go and open the header file, search for 10_6.
That's a great way to see what got added, what
got removed, what's marked for deprecation.
And of course, finally to get the official story on
a lot of these changes refer to the documentation.
The Doc folks have been working
feverishly to keep up with these changes,
and a lot of good things have been
documented so you can find out the real truth.
What the engineers meant to say
but couldn't in the release notes.
You can find it out there.
Now, typically at this point in the
talk is when there is one more thing.
Well, I have a few more things slide.
Woohoo. And this is basically a teaser for release notes
so I can go get you to take a look at the release notes.
So I'll just tell you a few things you can do in
10.6, but not necessarily tell you how to do them.
You can, for instance, now put
URLs directly into Preferences.
And this will do the right thing with regards
to your abbreviating your home directory.
It will also write it in a way where you can
read it back on 10.5 without support of this API.
This is something that we got a lot of questions about.
You can now source file names or in
fact any strings like the Finder does.
So it would be exactly like compatible
with Finder as far as sorting your strings,
which of course is important in different localizations.
You can now change the Desktop image fairly
easily without having to resort to hackery.
You can get a compiler warning for this.
NSLog(Message).
And here the message argument here is a variable.
Now, if you're wondering why should
I get a compiler warning for this,
it's a good thing that you'll get
a compiler warning for this.
But basically it involves potential security considerations
where you might provide a format string
that could cause a malicious activity.
So the compiler will now warn you for this
and other related usages, which are fishy.
You can now have NSErrors display a Help button in alerts.
As you know, NSErrors have the ability to return
recovery options where additional buttons will appear
in alert panels, letting the user do recovery steps.
You can now have a purple button up here on the alert
panel, which will bring up Help documentation if you wish.
So this is all part of NSError.
And again, this is all along the lines
of making NSErrors even more useful.
You can now animate integer and
color-valued properties in NSView.
Color-valued properties were actually animatable before.
We document them as such.
But it turned out they were only animatable in some cases.
You can read the release notes and find out
when, but now both of these actually work.
And of course integer valued property
also includes BOOL valued property.
And last but not least, in your Garbage Collected
application KVO observers will now be automatically removed
when finalized.
What this means is if you have finalize methods
where all you're doing is removing KVO observers,
you can now get rid of those finalize methods which
is of course very good for Garbage Collection.